Educators Movie 
Inspired by: The Wall Street Journal

SEX:	The #MeToo movement has many people expressing confusion regarding what constitutes sexual assault and concern they will be targeted with accusations. It’s also left a question mark surrounding what can be done about the apparent epidemic of sexual assault and harassment..

YALE:	One step forward, health experts say, would be to start funding better sex education programs in schools. Undergraduate women who took sexual education classes before college were half as likely to be sexually assaulted in college, according to a recent study by Columbia University, compared to undergraduate students who received abstinence-only education and saw no reduction in rates of assault. This is just the latest study to show sex education programs that put an emphasis on consent and healthy sexual relationships could help reduce the rate of sexual violence amongst young adults..

SEX:	Also see: Fellow Yale classmate: Brett Kavanaugh exposed himself during a drinking game.

SEX:	Only 24 states require sex education to be taught in schools, and of those, only 10 states specifically reference “healthy relationships,” “sexual assault” or “consent” in those programs..

FELLOW:	To receive funding, these sexual education programs are required to put “unambiguous and primary emphasis” on six sexual risk avoidance topics that “normalizes the optimal health behavior of avoiding non-marital sexual activity.”.

YALE:	‘As a kid, I was taught that men would try to get sex from me, and my job was to say no.’ —Andrea Barrica, founder of online sex education platform the O.school.

FELLOW:	These topics include what the program promotes as the advantages of refraining from non-marital sex, including the decreased likelihood of poverty, the foundational components of healthy relationships and healthy marriages, how drugs and alcohol increase the risk of premarital sex, and “how to resist sexual coercion and dating violence.”.

SEX:	“Conservative schoolhouse boards don’t want to teach consent because they’re worried that it opens the door for consensual sexual activity,” she said. “But when you teach kids that all sexual feelings are wrong and shameful, rather than natural, it actually makes consent violations more probable.”.

YALE:	The U.S. government has spent about $2 billion on abstinence-only sex education programs in the past two decades, according to reproductive health nonprofit the Guttmacher Institute..

SUBSCRIBE:	‘The whole question is how you minimize harm and the conclusive evidence shows by avoiding talking about these issues you actually make them worse.’ —James Hamblin, a lecturer on preventative medicine at Yale’s School of Public Health.

FELLOW:	Evidence shows teens are more likely to delay sex and have healthy, responsible and mutually consensual relationships when they do become sexually active if they are given comprehensive, rather than abstinence-only sex education, a 2010 study from Sexuality Information and Education_Department Council of the United States (SIECUS) found..

SUBSCRIBE:	She recommended that when a relative wants to hug or kiss a child, make it clear to the child they can say no. If a kid on the playground says they don’t want to play right now, make sure your child knows to accept that answer the first time they say, “No.”.

SEX:	“If we start having people learn from a young age not only what consent is but to respect another person’s boundaries, that goes a long way in terms of creating a culture where we don’t stand for people hurting one another,” Holt said. “We shouldn’t wait until someone is sexually active to teach them about sex and consent.”.

YALE:	This story was originally published on Sept. 19, 2018 and updated on Dec. 11, 2018..

SEX:	Get a daily roundup of the top reads in personal finance delivered to your inbox. Subscribe to MarketWatch's free Personal Finance Daily newsletter. Sign up here..

